AskScience AMA Series: I am Dr. Saad Omer and I'm here to talk about vaccines and the diseases they prevent. Ask Me Anything! With vaccine preventable disease outbreaks making headlines around the world, we would like to welcome Dr. Saad B. Omer for an AMA to answer any questions on vaccines and the diseases they prevent.

Dr. Saad B. Omer (www.saadomer.org) is the William H. Foege Chair in Global Health and Professor of Global Health, Epidemiology &amp; Pediatrics at Emory University, Schools of Public Health and Medicine. He has conducted studies in the United States, Guatemala, Kenya, Uganda, Ethiopia, India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, South Africa, and Australia. Dr Omer's research portfolio includes clinical trials to estimate efficacy of maternal and/or infant influenza, pertussis, polio, measles and pneumococcal vaccines and trials to evaluate drug regimens to reduce mother-to-child transmission of HIV. Moreover, he has conducted several studies on interventions to increase immunization coverage and demand. Dr Omer's work has been cited in global and country-specific policy recommendations and has informed clinical practice and health legislation in several countries. He has directly mentored over 100 junior faculty, clinical and research post-doctoral fellows, and PhD and other graduate students.

Dr. Omer has published more than 225 papers in peer reviewed journals including the New England Journal of Medicine, JAMA, the Lancet, British Medical Journal, Pediatrics, American Journal of Public Health, and Science. Moreover, he has written op-eds for publications such as the New York Times, Politico, and the Washington Post.

Dr. Omer will begin answering questions at 4:30pm EST and come find him on twitter ([@SaadOmer3](https://twitter.com/saadomer3)) after!

---

The AMA has concluded.  From Dr. Omer: 

&gt; Thanks everyone. I really enjoyed interacting with you. I know there are many questions I wasn't able to get to. However, I'd would be happy to continue the conversation in coming days over Twitter - a medium I use more frequently. My handle is @SaadOmer3.

&gt; P.S. Sorry for the typos (I'm sure there're many). I am a bad proofreader; particularly in a hurry.






