AskScience AMA Series: Hi! I am Prof. Nadav Davidovitch, an epidemiologist and one of the architects of Israel's coronavirus response and vaccine operation. Ask me anything! Hi! I am Prof. Nadav Davidovitch, an epidemiologist, public health physician, professor, and director of the School of Public Health at Ben-Gurion University of the Negev (BGU). I study health policy, vaccination policy, comparative health care systems, public health ethics and global health. During the pandemic, it has been my  honor to serve on Israel's national COVID-19 advisory committee, as well as on the COVID-19 Task Force of the Association of Schools of Public Health in the European Region.

My research focuses on various aspects of health policy, combining my multidisciplinary experience as an epidemiologist and public health physician with my knowledge of the sociology of health and public health ethics. I am involved in several projects related to legal and ethical aspects of public health practices, including pandemic response and health inequalities.

As a reserve medical officer during 2014's Operation Protective Edge, I was the commander of a medical unit of 700 physicians, paramedics, medics, and other medical personnel. I received my M.D. and Ph.D. from Tel Aviv University and my M.P.H. from Ben-Gurion University of the Negev.

I have authored or co-authored over 150 papers and book chapters, coedited 5 volumes and books and published work in leading medical and health policy journals, such as the New England Journal of Medicine, Clinical Infectious Diseases, Emerging Infectious Diseases, Journal of Pediatrics, Vaccine, Social Science and Medicine, and Law &amp; Contemporary Problems.

Here are a few links related to COVID-19 in Israel that you may find of interest:

+ https://aabgu.org/mass-vaccinations-effective/
+ https://aabgu.org/covid-breakthrough-test/
+ https://aabgu.org/covid-mass-inoculation/

Learn more about Ben-Gurion University of the Negev: www.aabgu.org

I'll be answering questions starting at 11am PT (2 PM ET, 18 UT), ask me anything!

Username: /u/IsraelinSF
