AskScience AMA Series: We are Bechara Choucair, Carole Johnson, and Tim Manning, the vaccine, testing, and supply coordinators for the White House COVID-19 Response Team. AUA! I'm Dr. Bechara Choucair and I'm the national vaccinations coordinator for the COVID-19 Response Team, focusing on coordinating the timely, safe, and equitable delivery of COVID-19 vaccinations for the U.S. population, in close partnership with relevant federal departments and agencies, as well as state and local authorities. I also leads our effort to administer 100 million vaccinations in the first 100 days. Before this, I was SVP and chief health officer at Kaiser Permanente and commissioner of the Chicago Department of Public Health before that.

I'm Carole Johnson and I'm the national testing coordinator for the COVID-19 Response Team. I previously served as the Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Human Services, managing the state's largest agency including Medicaid, child care, food assistance, aging services, and mental health and substance use disorder treatment. For more than five years, I served in the Obama White House as senior health policy advisor and a member of the Domestic Policy Council health team working on Affordable Care Act implementation issues and public health challenges like Ebola and Zika. I also worked on Capitol Hill for members of three key health committees - Senate Finance, House Ways and Means, and Senate Aging - and in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services' Health Resources and Services Administration, the Alliance of Community Health Plans, the Pew Charitable Trusts, and the American Heart Association.

I'm Tim Manning and I'm the national supply chain coordinator for the COVID-19 Response Team. I'm an emergency manager, doing disaster and emergency response for the past 25 years; I've worked at the local and state level, and served in FEMA for eight years as a Deputy Administrator. I've been a firefighter and EMT, and I know first-hand the importance of having the equipment and supplies you need, when you need it on the front lines of a crisis. Right now, I work with teams across the government - from the Department of Defense to the Department of Health and Human Services - to ensure our country has the supplies we need, not just now but into the future too.

We will be joining you all at 5 PM ET (22 UT), AUA!

Username: /u/thewhitehouse  
Proof: [twitter](https://twitter.com/RedditAskSci/status/1358799229519601664) (this is a verified AMA)

----

UPDATE: Thanks, everyone! We had a really good time and hope these answers helped. We'll do this again soon. - Bechara, Carole, and Tim
