AskScience AMA Series: We're the researchers who found that CBD can prevent SARS-CoV-2 replication, and that it has the potential to prevent COVID-19 in humans. Ask Us Anything! With the COVID-19 pandemic still going strong after almost 2 years, it's clear that we need more than vaccines to help stop the spread of the virus. In a study published last week in Science Advances, our interdisciplinary team of researchers found, to our surprise, that cannabidiol (CBD), a non-psychoactive cannabinoid produced by the cannabis plant, can prevent replication of the SARS-CoV-2 virus in human cells in a dish, and that mice who are pre-treated with CBD shower lower rates of infection when exposed to the virus. We also looked at real-world data collected from patients who were taking a medically prescribed CBD solution for the treatment of epilepsy and found that they tested positive for COVID-19 at significantly lower rates than similar patients who were not taking CBD. All together, we feel this provides compelling evidence that CBD could be a prophylactic treatment to prevent COVID-19, or even a treatment that could be used in the early stages of a SARS-CoV-2 infection. We are now hoping to launch clinical trials on the topic.

[Read a summary of the research paper here.](https://www.uchicagomedicine.org/forefront/research-and-discoveries-articles/researchers-recommend-clinical-trials-for-cbd)

[Marsha Rosner, PhD](https://benmay.uchicago.edu/faculty/marsha-rosner-phd), is the Charles B. Huggins Professor in the Ben May Department for Cancer Research at the University of Chicago. She usually studies the signaling mechanisms that lead to the generation of tumor cells and their progression to metastatic disease.

[Glenn Randall, PhD](https://microbiology.uchicago.edu/faculty/glenn-c-randall-phd), is a Professor of Microbiology at UChicago. He studies the roles of virus-host interactions in replication and pathogenesis in RNA viruses.

We'll be on after 1 PM Central (2 PM ET, 19 UT), Ask Us Anything!

Username: /u/UChicagoMedicine
